It's sometimes cool Ohm's Law gets mixed into problems where there's other types of forces present not
only electrical forces.
OK so in this problem I want to see an electrical force with other forces in the system for example
gravitational force and tension.
So let's have a look at this example and see how we would incorporate cool homes law to help us solve
this problem.
Here's the example so we have a two Styrofoam balls.
OK.
Number one and number two on this side.
And they each have a mass.
OK.
The masses 10 grams and they're suspended by threads and the threads we're given their length is 25
centimeters.
All right now these balls are charged.
OK so that's kind of what's gonna make this problem a little bit different.
And when they're charged after you set the system up they make this angle here which is 15 degrees with
respect to the vertical direction.
OK then I've got a couple questions relating to this configuration for these two Styrofoam balls.
First of all are the signs of the charges the same or opposite.
Do both of those have to be positive both negative or can one be positive or negative.
I think that one's pretty easy to say right.
This one definitely yes.
Right.
They both have to have the same because we want to have this repulsive force that pushes them apart.
If one of them was negative well then they would be stuck together.
Right.
They'd be kind of over here at the middle and they would rather be kind of right next to each other
like that.
But that's not what we have.
So yes they either have to be both positive or both negative are the magnitudes of the charges necessarily
the same.
All right.
Can you have a Q1 and Q2 and can those be different as long as they're both positive.
Actually the answer of this one is they don't necessarily have to be the same.
OK.
So not not necessarily.
You can actually have for example one cool arm and two columns.
Right.
That would produce a force on this guy in that direction and it would also produce we saw from Coombs
law an equal and opposite force on this one.
All right.
And it really doesn't matter on the magnitude of each one because these forces are going to be the same.
OK so that means that they don't necessarily have to have the same magnitude.
All right.
So that's kind of a little bit of a trickier problem so long as the force is the same the magnitude
of the charges can be different.
All right.
However with that being said in the last problem we're going to say let's find the net charge on each
one.
And the important thing here is we are going to assume we are going to assume that the charges are equal.
OK.
So let's assume that they're either both positive or both negative and we're going to get rid of this
little subscript because we're going to assume that both charges are the value Q And that's going to
give us a repulsive force and that's going to give us a free body diagram that looks similar to this
one.
We have a wait acting down because our styrofoam balls have a mass of 10 grams.
It's connected to a thread which means there has to be some tension acting on it in the direction and
the tension is always along in the direction of the thread or the rope.
And now we're going to have this new force which is our electric force and the magnitude of this guy
is given by columns law.
All right so let's go on the page the next page and set this up.
Now it doesn't matter whether you do a free body diagram on this guy or the other guy.
Right you're gonna get the same thing.
Just the.
Forces are going to be flipped around.
My attention would be like this my electric force would be like this.
And the weight would be down if I did it on the charge on the left hand side.
All right let's go set up the system and our equations and see how we can actually obtain.
Our goal is to find what is this value Q Right here.
So let's set it up and solve the problem right.
So here's the free body diagram over here and I've listed some of the numbers so the length of the thread
was 25 centimeters the angle here that the thread makes with relative to the vertical that angle theta
is 15 degrees.
I've also listed this number here or introduce the variable which is the distance between the two charges
which is r and that's required for cool Ohm's Law.
All right.
And if we look at just the charge on the right hand side again if it's not moving it should be an equilibrium.
So that means that the sum of the forces acting on that charge have to be equal to zero.
That's Newton's first law.
So since it's a two dimensional problem what we're gonna do here is we're gonna look at it in the x
direction and in the y direction separately.
This is gonna be my x direction and this is my vertical direction is the y direction over here.
All right.
So let's just kind of clean this up a little bit.
So in the x direction what do we have.
We have an electric force and the electric force is pointing to the right.
So we're gonna have plus the electrical force that's given by columns law.
We'll come back in a minute.
And then what else is acting in the x direction.
Well there's all a component of the tension right.
If I break my tension down into two forces there's this guy right here and this is the tension in the
x direction so I'm gonna write this as minus the tension in the x direction.
All right.
So we can take this one step further.
This is my electric force.
And how do I write tension in the x direction using the magnitude of the tension right here.
I could use some trigonometry over here if this angle is 15 degrees then the tension in the x direction
should be the tension multiplied by sign of 15 degrees.
Make sure you understand this part.
That's really important.
And that is should be equal to zero because there is no net force in that x direction.
All right how about in the vertical direction now.
Okay.
In the vertical direction we have two forces.
We have a component of the tension that is acting up.
That's this guy right here.
I'm gonna call this t y and then we have the wait acting down and the magnitude of the weight is simply
M.G..
Right the mass of the styrofoam ball multiplied by Little G and the mass was 10 grams I think.
All right.
So let's go back now and writes right the sum of the forces in the vertical direction.
So we have t y acting up and we have minus the weight or minus M.G. acting down again.
Let's get rid of t y and let's write it in terms of the tension T.
Again if that angle is 15 degrees that means that this interior angle here is also 15 degrees.
And then you should be able to write t coasts of 15 degrees minus the weight minus M.G. equals to zero.
OK so now we've got two equations right.
Here's equation 1 in the x direction and equation 2 in the y direction.
Now let's go see what our unknowns are really we want to get rid of tension right now because tension
doesn't help us.
So let me go ahead and first fix the equation 1.
What I'm gonna do is I'm going to bring t sine 15 on the other side so I have that my electrical force
should be equal to T sign of 15 degrees.
All right how about equation 2 equation to do the same thing.
I'm going to bring the weight on the other side and the weight is something I know because I know the
mass of the styrofoam balls.
So we have M.G. which is t coasts of 15 degrees for me to eliminate the tension which you can do here
is is using both of these equations.
Let's get rid of tension.
One thing I could do is just divide one equation by the other equation.
If I just divide both sides that's going to eliminate the tension.
So that's gonna be something I want to do here.
So if I do one divided by equation 2 this will eliminate
T and we're gonna be left with this.
So the electrical force divided by M.G. is going to be equal sine divided by coasts is actually tangent
tangent of 15 degrees.
All right one last step now I want to.
Well let's figure out what is my electrical force here for this problem.
So what I have our two charges they have the same magnitude.
Right so let's go ahead and write an expression for this electrical force we have our constant k both
charges are the same so that numerator for cool Ohm's law simply becomes Q squared and now it's divided
by the distance squared r squared R squared.
I don't really know right now.
Right.
However I do know that the string is twenty five centimeters long.
So actually if you use a little bit of trigonometry you should be able to find this distance right here
D right.
This is called D the distance from the charge all the way to the vertical are half.
And once you know D then R is simply going to be two times that value D.
So you should be able to write something like this.
This is simply two times D and then D you should be on the right in terms of some trigonometry.
You should be able to write this is too and this here should be D should be the length of that rope
twenty five centimeters already and meters right away and multiplied by sine a 15 degrees.
All right good.
So that is the value are you can go ahead and substitute and find a value for that.
And that's required because that's what gets substituted into my cool Ohm's Law.
All right.
So and again the reason you have to introduce this at the end this is what we're trying to find is the
Q value.
So let's do a little bit more algebra and get Q by itself.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to substitute this entire expression here inside my force the electrical
force expression right here.
First thing you could do is bring the M.G. over on the other side.
So let's go ahead and start by doing that.
Let's get rid of this and if I write it on this side I'm gonna have M.G. and the other thing I want
to do now is eliminate my electrical force.
So the electrical force I'm going gonna write it as K Q squared over R squared.
All right now you have to do is just get Q by itself which means I bring the r squared over here.
Get rid of it over here and I bring the K at the bottom.
Which means I can get rid of it there and I have to divide by that value okay.
The last thing I want to eliminate is the squared term.
So my final expression for q is equal to this.
And then you've got to take the square root of everything.
So I have tangent of 15 degrees I have the weight.
M.G. I have our squared and are here I'm gonna just go ahead and substitute everything here.
This is two zero point two five sign of 15 is kind of a really long expression.
You have to be careful when you substitute this in your calculator.
Then at the end it's divided by my constant K and everything here is actually under the square root
term.
B put another bracket around there.
All right if you're really really careful when you do this at the end you should get a value of the
constant.
Sorry the charge the magnitude of the charge which is zero point to two times 10 to the negative 6 and
that's measured in columns.
All right kind of a lengthy problem.
It involves two equations and two unknowns.
And the reason that we needed two equations and two at least two equations was even from equation 1.
We weren't really able to find the charge cube because we have to get rid of this right.
There is nowhere where we're asked to solve for tension and we don't know what the value of the tension
is.
So that's really why we needed the second equation in order to right the tension in terms of the weight
and the weight is something we know right.
The math was given as a 10 grams I think.
So remember to convert that into kilograms.
Anyway that's it for this problem.